there's a very famous experiment in
which rats were engineered to have no
dopamine and the scientists discovered
that if they put food in the rat's mouth
the rat would eat but if you put the
food even a body length away the rat
will starve to death which tells us that
dopamine is fundamental to get the
things that we need for our basic
survival now every time we're doing
something that's pleasurable from sugar
to video games work pornography social
media that will affect dopamine and the
more dopamine that's released the more
likely that drug or behavior is to be
addictive but also the genetic risk of
addiction is about 50 to 60% so if you
have a biological parent or grandparent
with addiction you are more likely to
develop that addiction we have to keep
it in balance in order to stay healthy
Dr Anna lmy is Professor of Psychiatry
at Stanford chief of the Stanford
addiction clinic and a world leading
expert on the subject of doping she will
tell you how this one powerful chemical
is controlling your life and what to do
about it one of the most important
findings in Neuroscience in the past 75
years is that the same parts of the
brain that process pleasure also process
pain and the balance wants to remain
level the problem is that we
automatically seek out pleasure and
avoid pain and we're exposed to all
kinds of Pleasures that we have in the
modern world and our brains are reeling
in response to try to compensate now I
need more of my drug and more potent
forms to get the same effect which then
leads to addiction and that's what
happened to me when I got addicted to
romance novels take me into that phase
of your life I was out of control and I
needed to restore a level balance and
take the advice I give my patients and
what is that advice
the Diary of a CEO is independently fact
checked for any studies or science
mentioned in this episode please check
the show notes this has always blown my
mind a little bit 53% of you that listen
to the show regularly haven't yet
subscribed to the show so could I ask
you for a favor before we start if you
like the show and you like what we do
here and you want to support us the free
simple way that you can do just that is
by hitting the Subscribe button and my
commitment to you is if you do that then
I'll do everything in my power me and my
team to make sure that this show is
better for you every single week we'll
listen to your feedback we'll find the
guest that you want me to speak to and
we'll continue to do what we do thank
you so
[Music]
much I've sat here for the last 20
minutes trying to figure out how to say
this to you so I'm just going to say it
how it comes out my mouth and I
apologize if this is messy but if there
was ever an episode this year that you
should listen to it is this one I've
since this episode was recorded about a
month ago all I've been thinking about
is how on Earth I get you to watch this
and I don't say this often the last time
I said this was the first time Mo gordak
came on this podcast this is the second
time I've said this in almost four years
of recording this podcast on YouTube and
the reason for that is so many of the
things that I know you're struggling
with in your life that stand in the way
of the person you want to become that
relationship you have with your phone
the
procrastination the cycles of behavior
that make you feel embarrassed and full
of shame that you've just never been
able to crack all of them all of them I
genuinely believe for many of you are
going to be understood today if you
listen to this episode it has changed my
life and it has changed much of the
lives of my team if if I'm wrong here
you have the right to message me and
tell me that I was wrong please listen
to this episode really really I mean
that from the bottom of my heart and
just to make sure you do throughout this
episode there's going to be these popups
if you collect eight of these codes that
are going to pop up on the screen and
put them in the document link below
you'll unlock something very special
some additional content please listen to
this
episode Dr Anna
lmy you wrote one of the most iconic
well-known books about dopamine which
propelled the subject matter of dopamine
into the public
Consciousness but I guess the most
important question I should ask you
is why does dopamine matter ah good
question good good place to start I mean
dopamine matters because it
fundamental to our survival right so
it's the chemical that we make in our
brain that tells us this is something we
should approach explore investigate so
it's it's really almost the survival
chemical so what is dopamine if you had
to explain it to a 10-year-old how would
you go about explaining it so dopamine
is a chemical that we make in our brain
um it has many different functions but
one of its most important functions is
that it helps us experience pleasure
reward and
motivation um it may be even more
important for the motivation to do
things than it is for the pleasure
itself so for example there's a very
famous experiment in which rats were
engineered to have no dopamine in the
brain's reward pathway and the
scientists discovered that if they put
food in the rat's mouth the rat would
eat the food would seem to get some
pleasure from the food if you can deter
that from watching a rat eat which I
think they felt like they could uh but
if you put the food even a body length
away the rat will starve to death the
idea being that without dopamine we're
not motivated to seek out the things
that we need for our basic survival
that's crazy so you get a rat you put
the food an inch from its mouth and it
will starve to death because it doesn't
have dopamine the dopamine required to
just reach out and eat yeah essentially
maybe it's not an inch maybe it's a
little more than an inch but the idea
being that dopamine is necessary to be
motivated to do the work to get the
thing that we need and having an
understanding of dopamine how might that
improve my life having a basic
understanding of how dopamine Works how
we process Pleasure and Pain and also
what happens with dopamine as we go from
adaptive recreational use to Mal
adaptive addictive use is something that
is really useful especially for those of
us living in the modern world where now
we're exposed to so many reinforcing
substances and behaviors that we've all
become vulnerable to the problem of
addiction and what are the biggest
misconceptions of on the subject of
dopamine because it's kind of thrown
around in society I see it in my group
chats people saying I need more dopamine
or whatever or you know that person just
craves dopamine what what are the
biggest misconceptions you've come
across the main miscon conception is
that somehow we can get addicted to
dopamine we're not getting addicted to
dopamine itself dopamine is neither good
nor bad it's a signal to tell us whether
or not something that we're doing is
potentially useful for our survival and
also it's related to what we predicted
about how rewarding or pleasurable
something would be and so it's really um
you know I sort of sometimes I joke it's
like the um reward theory of relativity
DOP mean is in the sense that Pleasure
and Pain really are truly relative to
one another and so dopamine gives us
information about where we are in that
relativity scale between Pleasure and
Pain and when you say relative you mean
I mean it's it's quite fitting for
anyone that can't see we have a a set of
scales on the table and scales are
relative to each other because if you
pour in one end the other end goes up
and if you pour in the other end the
other end goes up and this end goes down
and when you say relative that's what
you're describing right yes that's what
that's what I'm describing yes okay and
what activities that I do every day have
an impact on my
dopamine well probably almost everything
you know in some ways um I mean every
time we are doing something that's
pleasurable reinforcing rewarding that
will affect dope mean it's it's really
the primary signal that lets us know
that this thing is potentially important
for our survival as I mentioned um but
you know even um aversive stimuli can
trigger dopamine what's oh something
that's painful or not pleasurable
dopamine gets involved in in that um
equation anything that's novel or new is
something that triggers our dopamine in
in our reward pathway dopamine is
fundamental for movement so not just
pleasure and reward but also movement so
for example Parkinson's disease which is
a disease related to stiffness and
Tremor is caused by a depletion of
dopamine in a part of the brain called
the substantia and as dopamine
gets depleted in that part of the brain
people lose the ability to move their
bodies and it's probably no coincidence
that the same neurotransmitter that is
so important for pleasure reward
motivation is also really important for
movement because most organisms have to
to locomote toward the object of their
desire we want that thing we have to
exert effort right we have to put in the
work to go get it but in the world today
we really don't have to do that right we
can swipe right we can swipe left and
all of a sudden it magically appears at
the touch of a finger and that's very
confusing for our brains because that's
not how we evolved we really evolved for
for having to do quite a bit of upfront
work for a tiny little bit of reward
I just want to before we move on talk
about this point you said because I
think it's quite foundational to
everything we're going to talk about
about dopamine being relative to pain
and I have this set of scales in front
of me and here I have some chemicals
that are likely to produce dopamine in
my brain I believe right so alcohol I
have some rum I have some whiskey I have
some vodka and can you explain to me
using this rum whiskey and vodka how
dopamine is relative to pain and what
going on in my brain sure okay I'll
slide this over to you oh
okay so one of the most exciting
findings in Neuroscience in the past 75
years is that Pleasure and Pain are
collocated in the brain so the same
parts of the brain that process pleasure
also process pain and in a very simple
reductionist kind of way they work like
opposite sides of a balance so imagine
that deep in your brain's reward pathway
which is is another exciting Discovery
right that there's this dedicated reward
pathway of the brain that consists
broadly speaking of the prefrontal CeX
which is this large gray matter area
right behind our foreheads that's so
important for future planning for
delayed gratification for appreciating
future consequences you might think of
it as like the brakes on the car if
we're going to analogize to to a to an
engine and then deep you know in the
brain we've got what we call the limic
areas or the emotion brain and there you
have the nucleus accumbens and the
vental tegmental area that are rich in
dopamine releasing neurons right and
they act like the accelerator on the car
so when you've got a healthy functioning
brain you've got enough accelerator but
not too much right so enough dop Meine
being released but not too much and
youve got a healthy prefrontal cortex
putting the brakes on that dopamine
release when people um become addicted
there's either a problem with the brakes
the prefrontal cortex or the accelerator
the nucleus accumbens and vental
tegmental area or both right what we're
finding is that there's actually a
disconnect so there are large neuronal
circuits and Pathways between those deep
lyic structures and the prefrontal
cortex that literally get severed or
disconnected when people become addicted
as we think about Pleasure and Pain
being collocated in the same parts of
the brain working like opposite sides of
the
balance in order to understand what
happens in the addicted brain is to
appreciate that there are fundamental
rules governing this balance and one of
the most important rules is is that the
balance wants to remain level it does
not want to be tilted very long to the
side of either pleasure or pain and in
fact what our brain does is first tilt
an equal and opposite amount to whatever
the initial stimulus is so I'm going to
try to illustrate that here so let's say
our
initial stimulus is alcohol now alcohol
Works through its own chemical pathway
it works on our endogenous opioid system
the opioids that we make we have
receptors for opioids in our brains it
works on our endogenous Gaba system
which is our calming
neurotransmitter and at the end of the
day it releases dopamine in the reward
pathway so any potentially addictive
substance will release dopamine in the
reward pathway the more that's released
and the faster that's released in a
given individual the more likely that
substance is to be
addictive now another important concept
here is what we call drug of choice
which is to say what releases a lot of
dopamine in your brain may not release a
lot of dopamine in my brain and vice
versa right which is this idea that
people have predictions to different
kinds of drugs and by the way people can
get addicted to behaviors too I should
emphasize that when you say drug of
choice you mean the brain has a
particular sensitivity to that drug in
terms of dopamine yes okay the more
dopamine that's released the faster that
it's released the more likely that drug
is to be addictive for a given
individual so you're holding some
whiskey there I'm holding some whiskey
there could be a brain that is very
sensitive to Whiskey and there could be
a different brain that you could pull
all the whiskey and you like and the
dopamine response is sort of limited
exactly okay and for many of my patients
who become addicted to alcohol they will
tell you that from the first moment they
had alcohol they knew they were either
in trouble or had met their best friend
or some combination it was a very potent
experience for them all right so let's
let's go ahead and put this on the
pleasure side of the
balance dopamine is being released but
no sooner has that happened then my
brain will work very hard to restore a
level balance and by the way a level
balance is what neuroscientists call
homeostasis okay and one of the
overarching physiologic drives for all
living organisms is to return to
homeostasis homeostasis is that
parameter of what's often called called
affordances or states of being that are
adaptive and healthy for the organism
for example like we have a certain
homeostasis of body temperature and if
we go much too much beyond that either
too high or too low we will disintegrate
and die right so homeostasis is that
that states of being that are compatible
with existence
and and potentially advantageous too
sort of Baseline level that's right yeah
Baseline level and by the way we're
always releasing dopamine at a kind of
tonic Baseline level in our brains I
sometimes think of it as the heartbeat
of the brain so what's happened here for
people that can't see is you've poured a
little bit of whiskey into one end of
the scale the pleasure side of the scale
and the other side of the scale has
risen because now there's whiskey um in
the the pleasure side which I guess is
released dopamine exactly so now now we'
released dopamine in the reward pathway
okay because the pain side went up does
that mean there's now less pain in the
brain well I think you know again this
is a metaphor it's an oversimplification
the idea here is just when we press on
the pleasure side we're releasing
dopamine in the reward pathway and
experiencing pleasure okay okay but no
sooner has that happened then our brain
will try to compensate or adapt to
increased dopamine firing by down
regulating dopamine transmission for
example by involuting post synaptic
dopamine receptors that mean okay okay
so our brain is a bunch of wires you
know um that conduct these electrical
signals and and these long spindly cells
are called neurons and the thing about
neurons is that they don't actually
touch end to end there's a little Gap or
space between them and that Gap is
called the synapse and that Gap or
synapse is bridged by what we call
neurotransmitters and dopamine is one of
those neurotransmitters okay and when
the pre synaptic neuron pulses and
releases dopamine it crosses the synapse
and binds to a receptor on the post
synaptic neuron which either continues
or aborts that electrical signal does
that make sense yes okay so one of the
ways that our brain can decrease the
effects of dopamine decrease dopamine
transmission is by involuting or taking
inside the neuron the post synaptic
receptor that way when dopamine is
released it has nowhere to bind oh okay
so it's like removing the docking
station exactly very good it's removing
the docking station so essentially
getting back to our scale we've we've
you know ingested alcohol we've
increased dopamine firing in the reward
pathway but remember our pleasure pain
balance wants to return to the level
position level with the ground
homeostasis so it's going to decrease
dopamine transmission by for example
involuting those post synaptic dopamine
receptors but one thing about the brain
in its process of trying to get back to
homeostasis and again I like to think of
this neuro adaptation process as these
Gremlins hopping on the pain side of the
balance to bring it level again you
don't have Gremlins here you have these
little rocks but let's go ahead and put
a rock on the pain side of the balance
and the these rocks are are friends
right their job is to level the balance
because remember we got to go back to
homeostasis I'm going to put a rock on
and you're going to see oh my gosh it
overshot right it now I've got it
pressed down on the the pain side of the
balance but that's exactly what happens
in our brains in this process of neuro
adaptation those Gremlins hopping on the
pain side of the balance don't get off
as soon as the balance is level they
stay on until we're tilted and equal an
opposite amount so is that what a
hangover is or a cown as they would say
when people take drugs they say I have a
come down exactly that's exactly what it
is that's the hangover the come down the
Blue Monday or on a much smaller scale
just that moment of craving right that
moment of wanting to have one more shot
right why does it overshoot why can't it
just perfectly hit homeostasis such a
great question because then we'd feel
fine yeah why did Mother Nature do that
to us so cruel right yeah okay I'm going
to tell you an evolutionary just so
story what we mean by that is we don't
really know why you know this mechanism
exists but from an evolutionary
perspective if you're living in a world
of scarcity and everpresent danger this
is the perfect mechanism to make sure
that we're never satisfied with what we
have that we're always wanting more it's
made us the ultimate
Seekers okay because immediately after
getting something I'm now feeling a lack
of pleasure and I'm at a deficit you
know on the pain side of the scale which
means that I'm going to go seeking out
more dopamine and in a world where
everything is quite scarce that could
mean going on another 4-Hour hunt the
next day to go killer gazelle or
something perfect you got yeah you got
it interesting yeah okay so that's going
to motivate me because this get so Jesus
people that have hangovers don't seem
very
motivated right so now that's a so why
is that right it's because alcohol is a
product of human
engineering that releases so much
dopamine all at once in the reward
pathway that our brains are reeling to
compensate right we we really weren't
evolved for this much pleasure with this
much easy access as you said yourself we
were really evolved for to have to do
quite a lot of work upfront and to be
hungry and to be lonely and to be tired
and then get a little bit of reward that
would then bring us back up to
homostasis so really we were evolved to
be pressing on the pain side of the
balance in our effort to find pleasure
and then when we find it that little bit
of food or clothing or shelter or a mate
would bring us back to the level
position does that makes sense yeah so
you're you're telling me essentially
that we're all wired to be addicted
because if this is how our brain works
in a world it's designed to seek out
more dopamine but the problem we have
now is we have all the synthetic
dopamine effectively like this so
synthetic chemicals and synthetic things
and you know an Internet that is wiring
us to give us so much dopamine so easily
that that means that our brains are
effectively like mismatched to the world
that we live in and therefore wired to
be addicted yeah I think you actually
said that I found a quote you said in an
interview where you said we all wired to
be addicted and if you're not addicted
yet it's right around the corner right
coming to a website near you yes I I
guess I would I would qualify that a
little bit by saying we're wired for
survival in a world of scarcity that's
not the world live in now we live in a
world of overwhelming overabundance and
so there is a mismatch between this
ancient wiring that has us relentlessly
pursuing pleasure in order to survive
and a world that's so infused with
pleasure and so many rewarding stimuli
that now we're overwhelming our reward
system and our brains are reeling in
response to try to compensate so what
happens to this scale then in such a
world where I can get a big hit of
dopamine all the time using some of
these synthetic things or the internet
or pornography or whatever else what's
going on with this scale over and over
again okay great so let me get there let
me first say though that remember after
we do something that's highly
pleasurable our brain compensates with
neuro adaptation tilting an equal and
opposite amount to the side of pain and
then restoring our balance back to the
level position right or what we call
homeostasis so this doesn't last forever
right it's to pleasure then it's to pain
then it's back to the level position but
if we continue to consume our drug of
choice over days to weeks to months to
years and we add in a whole bunch of
other drugs and now we're consuming you
know pornography and smoking pot and
eating um donuts and you know you name
it all at the same time then essentially
what happens is those Gremlins on the
pain side of the balance end up camped
out there for anyone that see she put
all of the Rocks into the pain side to
represent All Of The Addictive behaviors
that this individual has now taken on
right and now we've entered addicted
brain by which I mean that we've changed
our honic or Joy set point to the side
of pain now we need more and more of our
drug in more potent forms not to get
high and feel good but just to level the
balance feel normal and this is not
going to be enough to level the balance
I would have to like keep filling this
much more than this container can hold
and that would be in Pursuit really of
just trying to level that balance so
that we can feel normal and when we're
not using we're walking around with a
balance tilted toward the side of pain
experiencing the universal symptoms of
withdrawal from any addictive substance
or behavior which are anxiety
irritability insomnia depression and
crav
so if I managed to get enough vodka
whiskey rum and pour it into the
pleasure side of the scale now that all
the rocks are in the pain side of the
scale I managed to outweigh
it it would it would what would then
happen more rocks more rocks would be
added yes more so momentarily yeah I
would maybe be in a little bit of
pleasure yes but then my brain would
remove those docking stations again
remove more of them and more rocks would
go in and I'd slam
down on the pain side again which means
I need more alcohol to try and get up to
pleasure SL okay so really you want to
you want to like dopamine fast you need
you need to just balance this and this
is so difficult because of the world we
live in it's almost it's it's it's funny
enough because this little scales
experiment um analogy here has given me
a huge amount of empathy for people that
are addicts oh gosh I'm so glad you said
that because I think that is the key to
empathy for the disease of addiction as
well as for people with the disease
having empathy for themselves is
recognizing that on some level it it's
it's out of their control right because
when we are tilted to the side of pain
the overwhelming drive to restore a
level balance or restore homeostasis as
quickly as possible overwhelms any other
rational thought about the consequences
of my drug use right it's just like get
back to the level position because if I
do that I'll at least feel temporarily
better
one of the things this analogy also
highlights for me is that people who are
addicted aren't trying to self harm
right and this is kind of the prevailing
narrative that if you're like why would
you do that to yourself right whereas
when I look at this analogy I go
actually what they're trying to do is
to deal with pain and we're all trying
to find ways to deal with our pain and
but in this analogy what ultimately
happens and I guess is what's happening
with addicts is the way they're choosing
to deal with their pain is becoming
self-destructive and that's creating
more pain right and it's this vicious
downward cycle yes and I think that sort
of reframing of what's going on there is
really critical because again it begets
more empathy absolutely I agree with you
and and I think you know we this this
metaphor it makes an assumption that we
all start with a pleasure pain balance
that's level with the ground but
actually that's probably not true right
some people at Baseline may actually be
more depressed or more anxious or may
have had life experiences that sets them
up for a kind of chronic stress reaction
and we know that people with
co-occurring psychiatric disorders for
example are at increased risk of
developing addiction probably because
they're reaching for that substance to
self medicate their psychiatric problem
the the issue with that is that it's not
medicinal right it's not healing
although in the short term substances
can help with those kinds of feelings
feelings of psychological and physical
pain over time because of the way the
brain adapts as we've
discussed substances and other addictive
behaviors just make psychiatric problems
worse right as we drive ourselves
further into the the kind of uh you know
the pain side of the balance so is this
why trauma often leads to addictive
behaviors because the trauma has caused
a a pain a stress and we're searching
for ways to
medicate that pain or stress yeah to
numb ourselves to not be present in our
reality and have to deal with what's
going on there is dopamine what role is
dopamine playing in it's all the same
dopamine
originally was to help us find those
things that we need to survive food
clothing shelter a mate we call those
Natural Rewards but
today that same reward pathway that
relies on dopamine has been hijacked by
all of these
artificial rewards that our brain
confuses as necessary for survival which
is why people with severe addiction will
be willing to lose you know not
consciously but unconsciously their
loved ones their homes their jobs
everything they have in pursuit of their
drug of choice it's because their brain
has been hijacked and they now confuse
the drug as necessary for survival the
other thing about drugs is that they're
incredibly potent they release a lot of
dopamine all at once which again is
confusing for our brain Natural Rewards
require upfront effort where we do a lot
of work and then we get a little bit of
dopamine and that's what our brains
evolved for I mean I can that makes
sense in my own life when I'm most
stressed or most challenged by something
professionally is when I I immediately
notice that my diet goes out the window
I start eating things that are bad I
actually stop going to the gym as much
um and it's it be can form a bit of a
downward spiral can't it I guess as
we've kind of seen from the dopamine
scale um can I can I get back to that
your question though about trauma and
stress so um there's a very series
there's a very interesting series of
experiments in rodents mice and rats
where they first of all rodents very
easily get addicted to cocaine they will
press a lever for cocaine until
exhaustion or death but if that cocaine
is then taken away that behavior will
extinguish which means that the mice
will eventually just stop pressing the
lever right because they're not getting
any cocaine totally makes sense and then
they'll go off and do something else in
the cage but if they're then exposed to
a very painful foot shock right so a
very extreme physical pain which you
could equate to a serious life stressor
the first thing the rat will do is run
over to the lever and start pressing for
cocaine which tells us that once our
brain has discovered a drug that
releases a lot of dopamine in our reward
pathway even after we stop using that
drug if we are exposed to an extreme
stressor our brain will tell us
immediately go and do that thing that
gives us a lot of dopamine because you
are under stress and I need to be
relieved of stress does that make sense
makes perfect sense yeah so if you
especially so if you discover your drug
of choice when you're younger and it's
food or it's pornography or if it's I
don't know anything that really made you
feel good for a moment a moment of
pleasure that will always become in the
case of these rodent
experiments the thing you run back to
when life gets hard right and we see
that again and again in people in
sustained recovery from addtion that
when they are under stress that is a
trigger potentially for them to relapse
so they have to be really thoughtful in
their lives for number one trying to
avoid stressful situations and and by
the way stress can come in many
different forms there's a great acronym
in in alcoholic synonymous called halt
hungry angry lonely tired those kinds of
stressors everyday stressors which we
all experience hungry angry lonely tired
can trigger us to want to use so people
in recovery have to be really thoughtful
about not getting too hungry not getting
too angry not getting too lonely and not
getting too tired at the end of this
conversation I want to go through all of
the sort of practical solutions that
someone struggling with an addiction to
social media pornography food whatever
it might be um Can Implement to try and
shift that cycle that they might be
going through especially when they're
halting hungry angry lonely or tired how
often have you worked with addicts have
you spent much time working with addicts
directly oh my gosh yeah so that's the
bulk of my career is working uh with
people with all different kinds of
addictions me an example of the most
obscure the most I had a patient who was
addicted to
water I know hard hard to imagine you
have to though understand her narrative
so she had a very severe alcohol
addiction she got into recovery from
that addiction and gave up alcohol but
she discovered that by drinking copious
amounts of water she could become
hyponic meaning that she could lower the
sodium levels in her bloodstream which
would then lead her to become delirious
and so in her desire to just be checked
out she would do that she would she
would drink a large amounts of water
she's doing okay no sadly she's not um
she she ended up taking her own life so
that was very sad
gosh in that situation was there was
there a root cause of that behavior
pattern further Upstream some kind of
trauma or experience that had set this
sort of cascade cascading set of issues
off yeah you know I'm just speaking
broadly um for for some patients with
severe addiction trauma is a huge Factor
um especially severe Early Childhood
trauma but there are also many folks we
see
who have kind of great parents and have
had happy childhoods and have great
social networks and and work that they
enjoy and yet they still become addicted
and that's because we again we are wired
to consume as much as possible of
whatever releases dopamine in our brains
to have survived Evolution to this date
and yet we're living in this world where
we have access to so many drug aied
substances and behaviors that we've all
become vulnerable to this problem and
the reason I highlight this is because
one of the things that I think has
happened in the field of addiction
medicine that maybe isn't the best is
that often times patients themselves as
well as their providers are digging
really deep to find the trauma or the
reason that someone has become addicted
and I think that that's important to do
in some cases but in in other other
cases it can lead to kind of
manufacturing trauma where there really
isn't any furthermore I would say that
when a person is in the throws of their
addiction they're not going to be able
to really do the complex emotional
processing of their trauma while they're
still using their drug of choice that
they really need to get out of that
Vortex of addiction and get into some
degree of recovery before you would even
want to go tackle some of those early
traumatic experiences how many people do
you think are struggling with some form
of
addiction well if you think of addiction
as a spectrum disorder right there's
mild moderate and severe um and there's
I would even say a kind of a pre-
addiction state where we're all sort of
dabbling in compulsive overc consumption
I would say the vast majority of us like
90 probably
95% have some degree of compulsive over
consumption and you know if and when it
tips over into what we would call
addiction there's not a brain scan or a
blood test to assess that it's not like
you know switching a light a light
switch and it's like oh yeah now you
have addiction um it's not like that
it's you know it's a gradual often a
gradual and Insidious thing and we don't
in fact have a biological measurement of
addiction we Bas it on what we call
phenomenology which is patterns of
behavior that re repeat themselves
across time and broadly speaking the
definition of addiction is the continued
compulsive use of a substance or a
behavior despite harm to self and or
others and so you know that harm can be
very subtle um or not right and it can
be a judgment call interesting because
we do throw the word Addiction around a
lot in society but but really the most
important part of that is to understand
if it's harming yourself or someone else
the behavior pattern yes that's right
and to also recognize that we're not
very good judges of that when we're
chasing dopamine okay so we sometimes
justify behaviors we have as being not
harmful and it's fine and it's not
impacting me at all and what do you mean
exactly and we don't we're not very good
at seeing true cause and effect honestly
when it comes to these behaviors which
is why often times people won't really
see the harm until they've stopped using
for a period of time in your book
dopamine Nation you talk about an
addiction that you had yes and it was
really surprising to me because I would
never have thought that being obsessed
with erotic
novels could be classified as an
addiction
what happened what was the behavior take
me into that that phase of your life so
I was in my early 40s um my kids were no
longer little um I got a lot of my
self-worth and identity from being a mom
and my kids were sort of entering
adolescence they were doing fine but
they didn't need me as much um so I had
kind of a grief reaction you know in
response to that was trying to figure
out you know how to navigate this next
phase of my life I'd always been a
reader and in particular a reader of
novels um in my own way that was how as
a child I self soothed was to escape
into uh the Fantasy Life of novels um
but I never had what what I would call a
problem with it and then one day I heard
another mother at school said that she
was reading this great book it was
called Twilight it was about these
vampires and she was going on and on
about it and I read it and I I can't
tell you what it was but it was just
like the the the key in my particular it
was completely
transporting it just released a lot of
dope mean is all I can imagine in my
brains reward pathway and so I read the
whole series and then I read the series
again and I read it again and of course
by the third or fourth time it wasn't as
you know reinforcing and I thought to
myself I wonder if there are any more
vampire romance novels and then for me
the real Tipping Point was I got an
e-reader I got a Kindle because what
happened was I I even before I got the
Kindle I started reading you know novels
that I would say I would be slightly
embarrassed to admit that I was reading
like kind of bodice Ripper novels as
time went on I I needed more and more
like graphic kinds of descriptions in
order to find it pleasurable and and by
the way that's classic for the addiction
narrative right where you start out with
a little bit and it goes a long way and
then over time you build up tolerance
that's neuro adaptation the Gremlins
pressing down on the pain side of
balance now I need more of my drug in
more potent forms to get the same effect
gradually over time I started um reading
you know more and more sort of graphic
erotic sexualized versions of this novel
and I would I was embarrassed so I would
hide that I was reading them and that
gets into the whole double life of
addiction where now we're lying about
our use we're we're using our drug over
here but pretending like we're not so my
kids or my husband would walk in the
room and I would be you know hiding
behind another book one book behind
another book so it looked like I was
reading something you know I don't know
more
sophisticated and then the Tipping Point
for me came really when I got a Kindle
or an e-reader and then my reading was
totally Anonymous I could read these
books anywhere any time no one knew what
I was reading and as soon as I finished
one um I could read another one and I
almost overnight became a chain reader
like literally when I was n doing
something else that I had to do I was
reading romance novels one after another
after another um which meant I was you
know less present for my kids less
present for my husband I would often
stay up till 2: 3 4 in the morning on a
week night reading romance novels have
to get up two hours later go to work
exhausted not able to be present for my
patience not enjoying my work gradually
getting more depressed more irritable
more anxious more insomnia we went on on
a a family vacation with an family
friends of ours everybody together at
this beach house all the kids playing I
was like hiding in a room reading
romance novels so and this is exactly
what happens with addiction is that our
Focus Narrows and the things that we
used to enjoy are no longer pleasurable
only this one thing has salience for us
we plan our whole whole day around
getting it using it hiding our use um
and that's what happened to me
it's so interesting because I was as you
were talking about that I was thinking
about all the behaviors that I have that
are maybe isolating me or you know I
just even things like spending a lot of
time on the internet just watching video
after video after video on YouTube or um
those kinds of things or just like
spending tons of time in my WhatsApp
group chat talking like roasting my
friends about nothing right how do you
know if like this is it's cuz on end of
the spectrum I could say okay well
that's harming my relationship with
people in the real world but
it's helping making me feel good and
it's you know maybe helping me in
another department because I'm learning
more about vampires or you know like so
like you know because there's there
might be net harm somewhere else but
then an upside over here which and then
I start rationalizing this Behavior like
how' you just distinguish between these
behaviors and know what's bad and what's
good you know what it's really hard um
these digital devices are powerful tools
but also very potent drugs there's no
doubt that digital media lights up the
same reward pathway as drugs and alcohol
these devices and platforms were
designed to be addictive that is to keep
us scrolling and tapping long beyond
what we plan for or what we want or even
what's pleasurable I think we can all
relate to using this
medium to a point where we don't even
like it anymore and yet have difficulty
getting ourselves off of it that really
speaks to the inherently reinforcing and
cognitively adherent nature of this
medium it is a drug and so you know if
and when and how we're crossing into
addictive
use I think we need to be very Vig
about whether that's happened in our
lives and one of the ways to do that is
actually to try cutting out that
particular digital medium that website
or that behavior for a period of time
long enough to experience withdrawal
potentially reset reward Pathways and
then re-evaluate because when we're in
the behavior as you yourself noted it's
very easy to rationalize oh I need to do
this for work oh I need need to do this
to stay in touch with my friends oh I'm
learning so much from this right and all
of that may have been true initially but
may not be that true anymore and what I
often point to is the subtler signs of
addiction which are things like
depression anxiety in attention insomnia
restlessness these can be early signals
for our consumption entering into that
addiction range but us not realizing it
because again we don't see cause and
effect which is why doing an experiment
like I did with my romance novels you
know following in the footsteps of my
patients and taking the advice I give
them and I gave my romance novels up for
30 days right just to see like okay I
think this is a problematic Behavior can
I give it up how will I feel and the
very first day that I the very first 24
hours hours that I did not read any
romance novel any novel at all I was
astounded at my level of anxiety
restlessness and utter insomnia I had
completely unlearned the art of putting
myself to sleep without this digital
narrative and that lasted a good 10 to
14 days completely mapping on with the
amount of time it takes typically to get
out of acute withdrawal that is to say
for those neuro adapt PA Gremlins to hop
off the pain side of the balance and for
homeostasis to to begin to be re
restored um but by the time I got to
weeks three and four I felt not just
better than I had in the first two weeks
but actually better than I had felt in a
really long time I enjoyed my kids more
I was more present for them I enjoyed my
husband more my work seemed salian again
I had started to think oh maybe I should
do something else you know maybe maybe I
you know this work I've been doing it a
long long time I don't it's not that
interesting anymore all of a sudden it
was interesting again right so you see
the relativity of that honic pathway and
how when we're doing that behavior or
substance that's so reinforcing that
everything else loses its salience we
can really
misidentify what is causing our
irritability anxiety insomnia until we
stop that substance for long enough to
see its impact on our lives how is it
making you feel because I think a lot of
a lot of people can't understand how you
could get addicted to a book I'm sure
some people understand that but but for
me it's not something I've ever become
addicted to so how how did it feel was
it like exciting is it arousing is it
somewhere in
between I mean I think that romance
novels are essentially socially
sanctioned pornography for women okay
and the medium is narrative and if
you're a person for whom narrative is a
powerful drug as it is for me a story a
narrative a fiction um very potent since
I was a child then you know it was a
natural that that that would be the
thing that I would get addicted to and
basically just like we've hacked and
bioengineered everything to make it more
potent I mean people there's a formula
for writing romance novels like if you
take a physical copy if you go to a
store and you pick up a romance novel
and you literally physically open it to
2third of the way through you will get
to the climactic scene pun intended
right it's it's like it's
engineered I mean I got to a point where
I wouldn't even read it read after I
wouldn't finish the book I would go on
to the next book just to get to the
climax part and then you'd move yeah and
I wouldn't even read the danum ma or
like what happens to the characters I
didn't care you didn't care about no and
also I didn't I got to point where I
didn't care about the quality of the
writing or the depth of the car it
didn't matter it was it was the drug it
was that moment I was looking for and
you know there are a lot of free books
on Amazon some some of which are high
quality and some of which are not but
like you know any good drug dealer knows
free samples that's the way you hook
people I would search for these free
samples and that's part of it too like
the searching for the drug so the
Working The Upfront work you do for the
drug is part of the drug right it's all
that you know the machinations and the
hiding and the this and the that that
gets to be part of like all of the
rituals surrounding it as you were
talking as well I thought about work and
work addiction yes because you earlier
used the term excessive consumption and
when I think about work even my work I
Think Jesus I excessively consume work I
start so many bloody businesses and
invest in so many things and if you look
to that behavior objectively if you're
like an alien looking down at me you'd
go this guy's got a problem do
you know what I mean you think you think
that's funny joking you
know I feel for you and it's funny cuz
in society we then those people are
reinforced we clap that's right we clap
we got this guy's not sleeping he's
working 18 hours a day clap clap clap
give him a trophy an award name a thing
after him or her or right you know um
and it's just really interesting that
that that addiction of work and you tell
me if it is it can be an addiction it's
certainly in the scale of one end being
sort of consumption excessive
consumption in the other hand being
addiction it's on there somewhere people
can get addicted to work
and part of the reason is that we've
drug aied work right when when I say
drug aied what do I mean we've made it
more potent and this is true for all all
these drugs we've made them more potent
more novel more Bountiful meaning
there's more of it and more accessible
so if we if we break that down with work
how is work more potent well certain
types of work are more reinforcing not
all types of work so for example Works
work White Collar work is often now
associated with stock options and
bonuses right um there's often like a
social media aspect to it or maybe even
a Fame aspect or as you point out those
are our cultural Heroes right so you get
all this you know agulation for being a
workaholic and that also because we're
such social creatures right and human
connection stimulates dope mean that
that also makes work more of a potent
drug personal brand right so you're
LinkedIn oh my God this person got a
promotion we all clap we the likes the
comments you're amazing the agulation
the a as you said the awards the
trophies and then you've got um the fact
the fact of novelty so once we've
exposed our brains enough times to a
certain drug as I said we develop
tolerance right and then we need more
potent forms or novel forms one of the
ways we overcome tolerance is by taking
our drug and then changing it slightly
like adding a little new molecule on
this chemical right or on the Internet
you know when we're searching videos we
want something similar to what we liked
before but just a little bit different
and that's what the algorithm does
automatically right it offers oh you
should check this out oh how about this
oh check that out right and that engages
our treasure seeking function we're
looking for that that novel thing but
that's not too novel right it has to be
in our category of things we like and I
think for work we have that too like
there are so many ways now that people
can engage in their work and it's not
all bad that it's novel but you know
certain types of work it makes it very
enticing then you have quantity
right I mean work never ends there's
like no natural stopping point for work
you know you do a line of cocaine you
run out of money you run out of cocaine
you're done right but that's not true
for work everywhere anytime and then
that gets to
accessibility one of the biggest risk
factors for addiction to any drug or
behavior is simple access we know that
if you grow up in a neighborhood where
drugs are sold on a street corner you're
more likely to try them more likely to
get addicted if you live in a world
where you have access to work
24/7 you're more likely to expose your
brain to more work and more likely to
get addicted to work again especially if
it's got all those other reinforcing
qualities this is probably in part why
people quit their
jobs you mean if they just get
overwhelmed or it's it's partially why
people can never quit but I think it's
important to make a distinction between
work that's reinforcing in those ways
and then work that's completely not
reinforcing yeah
alienating mind-numbing work in which
the the actual task is separated from
the meaning of a task I mean they quit
their jobs either in search of more
dopamine so if I'm working in a job
where I don't know maybe it once gave me
dopamine and now it's become monotonous
and the same right I I need to quit to
go find but there's novelty for you
that's right yeah and that's true people
many people change jobs every two to
three years I I recently read that the
the average life of a business now is
like 15 years whereas you know 50 years
ago it was 50 years and there's all this
turnover all this churn chasing novelty
also you know I I do want to emphasize
that people who are in work that's not
like intrinsically rewarding but is the
opposite kind of soul sucking that's
also a risk factor for addiction because
people just wait till the end of the day
till they can go home and then use a
drug to numb themselves from the stress
of work so it's it's plausible that
people who are in lower pleasure jobs
are more likely to be overweight or
addicted or dependent on alcohol yeah or
simply opt out of the workforce as many
young men are doing now in the United
States and what we know from data that's
been collected is many of them are
playing video games right they've just
completely opted out of the workforce I
guess this in part explains why there's
a drinking culture that's associated
with people who are potentially lower
class um because they're doing um
potentially
less pleasurable work
and they're therefore they if we think
about the scale that they would then end
up in the pub after work you know maybe
that's partially true but even people
doing like doctors and lawyers they're
are oh okay yeah equal rates of
alcoholism among those groups I think
what's happening there though is that
the nature of the work is just so
stressful whether it's white collar or
blue collar that there's this kind of
work hard play hard right I'm going to
work all day and at the end of the day
I'm going to reward myself so now you've
got a pleasure pain balance that's going
pleasure pain pleasure pain and and
remember the biological definition of
stress is any deviation from
neutrality so that every time our brain
has to work to restore a level balance
we're actually triggering our stress
response triggering our own adrenaline
it's stressful to have to restore the
balance from those extremes of Pleasure
and Pain I read in um your book you were
talking about how different behaviors
and sort of chemicals and substances
have different impacts and I was on page
50 of dopamin nation in a study of mice
sex increases the release of dopamine by
100% And amphetamines which is like
drugs right hardcore drugs increases it
by 1,000% by this accounting one hit of
a meth pipe is equal to 10 orgasms yes
it's interesting to think about that the
different behaviors we have and how
they'll have a bigger impact on our
dopamine is there like any in an in in
typical order of things that are like
extremely dopamine inducing and things
that aren't what's it like the top and
bottom of the list but in your view you
know I really think that it depends on
the person and we've got to look at drug
of choice right I mean potent drugs like
methamphetamine like opioids like
alcohol like nicotine like cannabis um
are are going to be very reinforcing for
many people but not for all people and
most people do have their one drug that
they sort of prefer above all others so
although generally speaking intoxicants
release a lot of dopamine in the reward
pathway um I think every person is going
to be different and also we we don't
really have good ways of measuring
absolute values of dopamine in human
beings right we can do that in rats but
we can't really do that in humans it's
it's relative values I've got this um
picture here which shows what looks like
brain scans in uh normal person but then
in someone who's addicted to different
substances I'll put this on the screen
and I'll link it below in the
description for anyone that needs it and
wants to see it but it effectively shows
the impact that like cocaine has on the
brain meth um alcohol and heroin what is
what is going on here so the red in this
image represents dopamine transmission
okay so how much dope mean is being
released from the pr synaptic neuron
Crossing that synapse binding to
receptors on the Sy aptic neuron how
much dopamine is kind of swirling around
in the reward pathway part of the brain
and what this image shows is that on the
left hand side in healthy control
subjects who do not have addiction
there's plenty of red right so there's
plenty of dopamine Transmission in the
reward pathway specifically here in the
nucleus accumbens but if you look at the
right hand column you'll see that in
these individuals who have been using
cocaine meth amphetamine alcohol and
heroin in addictive ways there's almost
no red which means there's decreased or
below normal levels of dopamine
transmission they are in a chronic
dopamine deficit
State this is evidence of the brain
trying to
compensate for too much dopamine being
triggered by down regulating its own
dopamine production and transmission not
just to Baseline but below
Baseline and importantly these
individuals who are addicted to these
substances these brain scans were done
two weeks after they stopped
using oh wow yeah which tells us that
this dop dopamine deficit State persists
for some period of Time how long well it
depends on the person but we know at
least from this experiment that the
first two weeks are this persistent
dopamine deficit state which is
consistent with acute withdrawal right
people feel when they first stop their
drug of choice they feel terrible right
they experience all of the symptoms of
physical withdrawal that correspond with
that particular drug they were using
usually the opposite of what the drug
did plus the universal symptoms of
withdrawal from any addictive substance
or behavior anxiety irritability
insomnia depression and craving now if
they can get through the first 10 to 14
days what we see clinically is those
acute withdrawal symptoms slowly start
to get better and we think that that is
mapping on to regenerating dopamine
Transmission in the reward pathway and
if they can make it to a month that's
usually the point for for on average in
based on clinical experience when people
really can start to get out of that
constant state of craving for their drug
of choice and begin to see some light at
the end of the tunnel for what their
lives might look like if they can
maintain abstinence from their drug and
we can't just inject or drink dopamine I
mean I guess that would be like drinking
alcohol we can't just artificially mess
with the the balances to try and restore
the dopamine levels in an addict can we
can't just add a little bit of dopamine
yeah it's it's a great question because
we have some natural experiments that
suggest what what might happen if we do
that so as I mentioned before people
with Parkinson's have depletion of DOP
mean in the substan That's What
Causes That that motor disease the
treatment for it is to give L Doopa
which is a dopamine precursor if I were
to give you a spoonful of dopamine it
would do absolutely nothing because it
doesn't cross into the bra the brain it
doesn't cross the blood brain barrier
but I could give you lopa which is a
precursor chemical that would cross your
blood brain barrier and get turned into
dopamine and then diffusely bind
dopamine receptors in your brain in the
reward pathway but also in the movement
Pathways when we give patients with
Parkinson's dopamine in this form that
can temporarily improve their movements
but in about one in four Parkinson's
patients they will develop a denovo
addictive disorder shopping addiction
sex addiction other types of addiction
because we have the same problem we are
stimulating
the reward pathway with dopamine that is
ingested exogenously from the
outside and our brain reads that as oh
boy got to compensate by downregulating
dopamine transmission to below Baseline
which then puts us in that addiction
Vortex does that make sense it does so
we have to I mean it tells me that we
have to live lives in a certain sense of
we have to live our lives in a certain
sort of
homeostasis and
it's so easy not to in the world we live
in it's like it's like impossible to
live in a perfect homeostasis balance in
the world we live in right even more
than having to try to live within this
sort of narrow range of homeostasis in
the world we live in today we probably
have to intentionally do things that are
painful do things that are hard pleasure
pain balance like we learn that when we
press on the pleasure side of the
balance like with alcohol or pornography
or romance novels or cannabis or
whatever it is right no sooner does that
happen than our brain adapts by those
neuro adaptation Gremlins hopping on the
pain side of the balance to bring it
level again but they like it on the
balance so they don't get off right when
it's level they stay on until we're
tilted an equal an opposite amount to
the side of pain that's the come down
the hangover Etc but it turns out the
opposite is also true if we
intentionally press on the pain side of
the balance for example with exercise or
an ice cold water bath or intermittent
fasting those Gremlins will hop on the
pleasure side of the balance and we will
get our dopamine indirectly by paying
for it up front and there are studies in
humans showing that when humans expose
themselves to exercise for
example dopamine levels gradually rise
over the latter half of the exercise and
then when the exercise stops dopamine
levels will remain elevated for hours
after afterwards before going back down
to the Baseline level position without
ever going into that dopamine deficit
state so it's a great way to get our
dopamine in directly because it's much
less vulnerable to that compulsive
craving phenomenon of overuse so you're
not going to get an exercise come down
you can butc and people can get addicted
to exercise right but typically it's
it's very unusual because The Upfront
cost
to to do the work and endure the pain of
exercise in the first place mitigates
our vulnerability to an exercise
addiction and in general H okay CU it's
so hard to do that it's going to be it's
not like pulling a lever on a slot
machine or clicking on a porn website is
difficult yes okay so fighting for the
dopamine
is insulates us against the chance of an
addiction having to really fight hard
for it okay yeah and this kind of
explains I guess in part why
I pulled out some stats ahead of our
conversation today that from 1996 to
2008 participation in ultramarathons has
increased by
1,676 the ice bath Market is expected to
rise from 350 million in 2024 to to
nearly half a billion by 2030 the number
of people taking part in obstacle course
races like tough mut or hrock etc etc
has increased by almost 7x from 2010 to
2017 it seems like in society there's
this counter movement towards people
seeking out hard dopamine chasing pain
yeah those are amazing I didn't know
that those are amazing numbers um you
know in general there's a part of me
that wants to say well that's a good
thing um but there there's another part
of me that's wary also because we're so
good at drug aying everything that we do
that there's a way in which these types
of behaviors can also be drug aied right
made more potent with all of the
technology the way that we count
ourselves the leaderboards the social
comparisons all of that takes this thing
which is really in its natural state
kind of impervious to addiction like you
just typically wouldn't get addicted to
these types of painful physical
activities you would do what you needed
to do for survival but we've managed to
make them addictive in all these
different ways I still think it's a
better way to get your dopamine like I
really encourage exercise we always talk
about movement as medicine and in
general our our life is so convenient so
easy so passive so sedentary that I'm
telling patients all the time you know
get up off the couch move your body walk
around the block I think that's the
bigger obstacle right now is just
getting people to move but I do think we
need to be wary of not going too far in
the direction of like the ultra Ultra
Ultra whatever it is so what is a better
way to live if we're trying to optimize
happiness and to keep our dopamine in
balance and not have the crashes Etc and
come downs and hangover what is a
optimal way to live our lives do we have
to look back at our caveman ancestors
and live like them I think that part of
the problem is that we've
organized Our Lives now around
rewards almost everything that we do is
predicated on the Feelgood moment we'll
have at the end of it and because of
that that we
are missing out on the
process we're projecting our psyche
forward into the future toward the
reward and not able to really be here in
the moment okay this is going to be
sound weird I'm going to give you a
weird example so driving over here today
I found I was nervous for this interview
and in a way looking forward to it but
in a way wanting it to be over right and
and in seeing that in myself I thought
that's so sad like that's that's so sad
that we live our lives that way myself
included always this weird blend of
wanting whatever we're doing to be over
so that in a way we can just go hide and
do whatever that self- steem thing is
that we do where we're safe and we're
like you know stimulating ourselves in
some way and then I thought well what if
I knew that I was going to die right
after this going come off really weird
now but what if I knew that I was
actually going to die right after our
conversation today
that totally changes my perspective
doesn't it because this time you and I
have that's all I got it's over for me
when this so this this conversation is
it I really better be right here right
now and really taking joy in whatever
you and I can find together and and I
think the more we can do that the better
what's happening there you're removing
the thought of the outcome the rewards
the potential you know failure or
whatever and you're focusing on just
being present and in doing so what is
happening it's a great question and I've
actually given this quite a lot of
thought because I remember when I was in
college and I you know met some like Zen
people and they were like be here now be
here now and I thought well whenever I'm
here now I'm miserable like I I I don't
like me and I don't like being in the
world I I don't want to be here now I
want to be somewhere else so I didn't
really understand what they were getting
at
it really took me you know till I had
lived quite a lot of life and had some
you know some significant experiences
and given it some thought that I
realized oh be here now means be here
now and be
uncomfortable and be okay with being
uncomfortable and being okay with not
being able to
control my pleasure or my pain or my
comfort level but just being open to
whatever comes and I think that's a
really a key shift
that I'm not trying to control my
experience in the moment and that it's
okay to be unhappy or Restless or
uncomfortable and not trying to run away
from that but just really turn and face
it and embrace the discomfort which I
also think is quite Universal I don't
think I'm I'm alone in that and then the
key piece about not not anticipating the
reward is helps me be in the moment
right because I'm not just waiting for
the good thing to come after I'm saying
to myself imagine there's nothing good
coming after nothing at all right
there's just there aren't rewards this
is it and then also being able to say
and it's okay if in the moment like it's
not great like I I can Embrace that you
know I can be unhappy or Restless or
anxious or whatever it is and then when
I do that you know I feel like there's a
funny funny thing that happens and all
the sudden I I'm not as anxious right
and I am present and it there is some
Joy there interesting so when you allow
yourself to deal with being
uncomfortable in the moment it turns out
you it removes the thing that was making
you uncomfortable in the moment which is
like the avoidance or the worry or
overthinking whatever else yeah I I
think we have this and it's fed by
modern culture this kind of expectancy
that really we should be happy all the
time and if you know if we've arranged
things appropriately for our lives and
if we've done our work and you know
aimed true then we should just be like
life is great and I don't believe that
anymore I think that you know I mean
like Buddha said life is suffering but I
really think that
fundamentally like it's uncomfortable to
be
alive and that it's a kind of a constant
state of restlessness and discomfort if
we're being really honest and and tuning
in when I really let myself see that and
feel that all of a sudden I'm I'm freed
from from some of
that what has caused your anxiety
throughout your life in the moment you
you referenced earlier that some things
have happened that have led you to
understand this better and understand
yourself better what is what am I
missing from this jsaw puzzle yeah well
you're you're good you could have been a
psychiatrist oh really yeah it's always
time this doesn't work out there's still
time right it's not too late you get a
new profession yay um I think you know
for me the the big Turning Point um was
that we lost our we lost a child and um
in the immediate aftermath of our
child's death I was just determined to
like sort of undo the experience
and um you know get enough Psychotherapy
and enough whatever whatever it took to
sort of not feel that pain and it wasn't
until I really just said oh like I'm
going to feel this pain for the rest of
my life it's never going away that
suddenly I felt some relief from that
pain and that was a real window for
me so interesting that the
it's
acceptance yeah and and you know and and
I think you know one of the reasons I
love treating patients with addiction is
because I really relate to that hitting
bottom moment you know that moment when
it's like you just have the feeling that
like everything I try to do to manage
this Behavior or to make my life better
only makes it worse I felt like I had a
very similar
experience um and that it was only when
I kind of realized oh I yeah I I can't
run from this I cannot run this pain uh
that I I begin to have some the
beginnings of relief from that
experience I can't outrun this
pain it's all natural sort of
disposition to try and outrun pain isn't
it that's the irony right we're really
wired to outrun the pain we are like we
reflexively seek out pleasure and avoid
pain and yet that's the very thing thing
that doesn't get us to where we want to
go but we do now live in a world where
it's very easy to outrun the pain yes
this is a lion that's chasing me this
could be a bad email and then I open up
a tab and start Doom scrolling or open
up a tab and start watching video
playing video games or pornography or
whatever yeah that's exactly right there
are so many ways that we can now
distract ourselves from you know our own
suffering or our own
awareness and where do you find yourself
now with dealing with that grief and the
pain as we sit here yeah I mean I I feel
like in many ways it's been a real gift
in my life you know it's really informed
my life in in ways that um I mean I I've
learned things from that experience that
I think it would have been almost
impossible for me to learn otherwise you
deal with a lot of people that are in a
state of
suffering
I imagine that's a
weight because I um even hearing the
story of the lady that passed away after
that water addiction it was like a it
was like a weight on my shoulders just
to hear it
so if your profession puts you right at
the heart of this type of suffering how
do
you manage that to to hold that
weight a couple things um first of all a
lot of people get better and when people
with addiction get better
it's so much better that it's incredibly
rewarding to see and they're amazing
people Absolut like the most tenacious
talented people you'll ever meet and
when they get better it impacts so many
other people right their friends their
family the people they work with so it's
very rewarding work and and not at all
burdensome of course you know for
patients who don't don't get better or
patients who die it's a terrible feeling
and there is a sense of um
responsibility and and guilt even when I
feel like there was nothing that I could
have done otherwise um you know I carry
those losses with me so it's hard is
there any particular cases that have
stayed with you the most I mean every
patient I've had who's died while under
my care those are incredibly painful um
and I will never you know those are sort
of a those people will be with me as a
part of me for all of my life young and
old yeah young and old yeah it's
especially tragic to you to lose young
people and it always feels like their
second gu ing like oh if only I had done
that or if only we had intervened here
but I just think that's the nature of
death we we can't get away from the
feelings of guilt around it no matter
who we are and no matter the
circumstances how young can addiction
and the consequences of
addiction ruin someone's life like how
young can someone be when their life is
ruined from from the work you've done
and the the patients you've worked with
and what are those addictions typically
that seem to be most um susceptible to
those that are young
well I mean you know some some kids
start with drugs and alcohol you know
five six seven eight five six yeah I
mean it's you know some some some kids
use with their parents or their
caregivers they're exposed very early if
we seriously conceptualize digital media
as a drug I mean then we've got you know
even younger cohorts starting with that
and we do know that kids can get
addicted to digital media
and as a result um die from that I mean
there was just this tragic case of a
young man who essentially got addicted
to a chat box I think he was 14 not my
patient it was written up um in the New
York Times in the Wall Street Journal
and he fell in love with this chat box
started to isolate wasn't spending time
with his family or friends and then
eventually took his own life purportedly
so he could join this imaginary person
what's the youngest patient you've ever
seen the youngest I've seen is probably
around 15 14 15 and they had an
addiction yeah usually cannabis alcohol
nicotine can you get addicted to
cannabis oh yeah oh my gosh cannabis is
very addictive really oh yeah
yeah harmful very harmful the target
organ that it damages the most is the
brain um it's harmful in many ways I
mean it number one it demotivates people
often and so they can have the feeling
that they're getting stuff done or that
they're creative when in fact they're
not doing
anything um it most people smoke it and
so it can be damaging to the lungs and
and other other organs um a lot of
people say that well cannabis isn't
addictive because I don't have this
standard withdrawal phenomenon when I
stop like I don't have the shakes or
anything like that but keep in mind the
universal symptoms of addiction are
psychological symptoms anxiety
irritability depression insomnia craving
and people have that in Spades when they
try to stop using cannabis plus we often
see something called the hyperemesis
syndrome so cannabis can help with
nausea and vomiting it can help decrease
the feeling of wanting to vomit but
again as the brain continues to be
exposed to it there's this process of
neuro adaptation it stops working and it
can even turn on them and do the
opposite So eventually people can
actually have a cyclical vomiting
syndrome as a result of cannabis so
they'll show up in the emergency room
and say I can't stop I can't stop
vomiting and the reason is because of
the Cannabis that they maybe initially
started uh to stop feelings of
nausea on page 40 of dopamine Nation you
say we've lost the ability to tolerate
even minor forms of discomfort yeah and
as I was reading through this section of
your book I was thinking it sounds like
we've gone a little bit soft in society
um we've reset our pleasure pain
threshold to the side of pain that even
the slightest thing feels like trauma to
us even things that objectively speaking
a generation or two ago would not have
been considered traumatic are now trauma
we live in a bit of a trauma Society uh
one that doesn't appear to be very
resilient and the only measure of that
that I have is if I think about the work
that my grandfather had to do versus the
work that you know people maybe in my
generation do in complain about and seem
to be like objectively suffering over
and stressed about it seems like there's
been a shift in our threshold our
tolerance levels can this be explained
through dopamine what's going on here
and do you believe that's true have we
gone a bit soft I would say succinctly
yes I do believe we have gone a bit soft
but I don't think it's a moral problem
or a character problem I actually think
it's a physiological problem based on
the fact that we're insulated from Pain
and we're exposed to all kinds of
Pleasures so I really think that we have
individually and collectively reset our
reward Pathways to the side of pain
meaning that the Gremlins have now
accumulated on the pain side we've
tipped ourselves to the side of pain
because we've had so much pleasure
because we've had so much pleasure yes
thanks for having me clarify so that you
now we need more and more pleasure to
feel any pleasure at all and the
slightest little pain and we're you know
experiencing excruciating pain you add
to that the fact that we have a culture
that tells us we should never be in pain
and that if we are something's wrong
with our life or something's wrong with
our wife or something's wrong with our
job and so now you've got you know a
whole generation of folks who feels
like they're experiencing more pain
because they're literally don't do not
have the mental calluses to tolerate
pain and now they're being told and if
you have any pain at all you must have
you know something wrong with your brain
go see a doctor go take a pill and I
think this is really uh this is not a
direction we want to keep going in
we have a mental health culture where we
assume most things are mental health
illness um in page 186 of your book you
say I've become convinced that the way
we tell our personal stories is a marker
and predictor of mental health now if
you live in a society where everything
has a label and it's a it's a disease or
an illness or you know I I don't feel
good today so I've got this disorder and
therefore I need this
medication I guess there's two questions
is my assessment of this situation
correct and
be is this a bad place to be in a
society where we think everything every
feeling we have every you know we think
everything that makes us different is a
deficiency let me let me start let me
let me answer this by talking a little
bit about the role of language and
narrative because I think this is very
fascinating and you know as a
psychiatrist and a therapist that is my
bread and butter right is is narrative
how people tell their stories by by
giving language to our experience
we gain awareness of our conceptual
models of the world okay okay and what I
have learned over time is that the way
people tell their stories is a window
into their model of the world and that
there are healthy narratives and not so
healthy narratives and in general in my
clinical experience when people come
into the room and they tell their life
story in such a way that they're always
the victim of other people and
Circumstance in the world those are
people who are number one not doing well
and number two not going to do well
going forward unless they change that
narrative to acknowledge what they've
contributed to the problem and the
reason for that is because the way that
we narrate Our Lives is not just a way
to understand our past it actually is
our road map for the future so if I see
myself as a victim and that's my
narrative I will literally create
victimhood for myself going forward I
will literally change my sensed
experience so that whatever happens I'll
make sure I end up as a victim when
people with severe addiction get into
recovery one of the most palpable
changes that I see is the way that they
narrate their lives they go from in
addiction talking about their lives as
if it's always everybody else's fault to
in recovery talking about their lives in
a way that says oh you know what I could
have done better here or you know what
that's something that I keep doing that
really messes with my life that I want
to change and I'm going to figure out
how to change that why is it so hard to
take responsibility in such a way great
question we just hate to do it because
when we do it we feel shame and shame is
an incredible painful emotion it's like
a gut punch of an emotion that is
associated with fear of Abandonment fear
of being shunn by our tribe we'd much
rather paper that shame over with anger
and resentment toward others it's it's
interesting
because there'll be a different groups
of people listening to this now there'll
be the high responsibility group that
just love and revel and taking
responsibility because they think taking
responsibility means that they are
strong it means that I'm so strong I can
take the blame and withstand it and it's
funny cuz the more I've learned to take
responsibility for things in certain
areas of my life The more I've become
proud of myself and the more I think I'm
strong and I'm like oh look at me I can
take responsibility for anything and it
doesn't and then if you go down this
spectrum you'll eventually get to the
end of the spectrum where you've got
people who even as they heard you say
that will feel cognitive dis they'll
feel a sense like a little it'll
irritate them it'll piss them off and
they will be the whatab about gang
they'll be saying yes but what about
Dave he did this to me and you know
they'll immed like the immediate
reaction would be they they're pissed
off they've probably gone now they've
gone so we're not even talking to them
anymore but if you but it's fine we can
talk about them they're no longer here
but that group of people my question
really is how do you speak to that group
of people and convince them that
actually taking personal responsibility
is a good thing for them and if they're
focused on what their core values or
their North Star is in their life then
personal responsibility is the path
there not blame not victimhood you know
like how do you turn those people around
great question and I have to say what I
know about this I learned from Al
Alcoholics Anonymous and what they do
because they do something that's really
incredible first of all it's necessary
to validate somebody's victimhood so
this is to say you have been wrong if if
they really have been wronged to
validate that or you experience this
trauma or you were born into this crappy
situation and you were just a kid and
you had no choice about that and to
really acknowledge that but then the
fourth step of the 12 steps of Alcoholic
Anonymous talks about looking at each of
those
situations and after writing down like
this person wronged me and exactly what
they did so you know taking time to
focus on the resentment
right then only after that to say okay
but is there
anything that I did that contributed to
that problem is there anything at all
that I could have done differently and
for a little kid you know born into a
horrific situation you there's not much
right that that a kid could have you
know we don't we don't expect a child to
take responsibility but the adult who
was that child who continues to
perpetuate some of th the harms they
experienced on other people now we're
talking now you can begin to take
responsibility for your actions in the
world so I think starting with
validating you know the trauma or the
victimhood or the way in which we were
wronged processing it so giving it
airtime right but not stopping there
which is by the way which is by the way
often you know in therapy certain types
of therapy that's often where we stop we
don't then take it that very important
next up and say but you know let's go
and look at that again and like is there
anything at all that you're contributing
to this problem maybe it's just that you
continue to ruminate about it right that
like you're ruminating on your
resentments is in a way your happy place
and maybe that's what you need to stop
doing so that form of sort of
psychotherapy that stops there can help
keep us sick and make us sick it it it's
interesting because someone that's in
that therapy room who has ruminated
themselves all the way down to having a
low self-esteem being depressed or
whatever um it appears to me that people
who are at that sort of ground floor
State find it hardest to take
responsibility for some reason just
that's an observation in my life that
the the people that I have met that are
the worst or that struggle the most with
taking responsibility are those that
have a very low self-esteem so it's
almost this double-edged like Catch 22
and then I I've also P pondered whether
you know someone that never takes
responsibility is more likely to have
bad things happen to them make mistakes
which are then going to further hurt
their self-esteem which are going to
make it even harder to take
responsibility so I guess the question
is is there this Rel is there a
relationship between my current
self-esteem and my ability or inability
to take responsibility for a situation
yeah great great question it brings to
mind a a patient of mine who um who said
to me that
um you know that and he had very very
low self-esteem and he said essentially
Dr ly I'm the piece of crap around which
the universe
revolves meaning that he had his own
brand of
narcissism in which he wasn't the most
successful person he was the most
successful at being the least successful
person and that became his identity
right that was sort of how he saw
himself and also how he saw the world
and it became very entrenched and it was
a kind of a narcissism
because he created then situations in
order to perpetuate like I'm the worst
of the worst so I think the ways in
which we get these sort of entrenched
ideas about ourselves and the world can
really hold us back from seeing clearly
Who We Are Who other people are and what
what the possibilities are does our
personal narrative need to be positive I
mean what do I guess what do you mean by
positive like ra I'm great almost like
have a have a positive ending because I
was thinking about the personal
narrative I've created in my life and my
personal narrative is like kid born in
Africa came to the UK little bit of
racial abuse here and there felt
different shame insecurity parents
weren't around this made me independent
the shame made me motivated and then I
did this this this and it went well
that's like my personal narrative um but
if my personal narrative was moved to
Plymouth from Botswana in Africa a
little bit of Shame little bit of pain
parents weren't around my parents didn't
love me people don't love me right right
if my personal narrative ended there
would it be you know would it be
detrimental to me ever becoming
successful happy healthy I'm just
wondering if because we all have a
personal narrative we have like a story
if we're up on stage and someone passes
a mic to us and says tell us your story
we'll narrate this version of events um
skewed towards victimhood to heroism to
you know yeah I mean as I said before
how we narrate Our Lives is important
right it's it's not trivial and there
are healthier narratives and there are
not healthy narratives and and I would
argue that the you know the victim
narrative where you know perpetuates
victimhood you could make the same
argument that the the hero's journey
narrative perpetuates hero good having
said that if we get too stuck in any
fixed Identity or any narrative I think
that can become its own trap right and
then we wall ourselves off feeling like
we have to show up in a certain way or
be a certain person and I wonder if you
have that experience like you know you
have this hero's journey and now you got
to be this hero and I mean I could
imagine that that would be burdensome at
times yeah I think it causes a lot of
like dissonance internally what I mean
like dis so when I say dissonance I mean
discomfort internally because people
meet a version of you that doesn't
reflect the version of you that you know
so like that the experience you have
when you go like I go to the gym or
something yes and I say this to my team
all the time anyone that knows me
personally his head me say this 50 times
I will say the phrase I just don't
understand what these people are talking
about like I just don't get it and I
said to my team the other day in the
office I went it's almost like I think
they're lying to me and I said I was in
this I was in this meeting group when
you say you don't understand you mean
when they when they praise you or okay
yeah yeah it's so yeah unbelievable what
they're saying to me that it
um that it feels like you're I've not
even watched the trumman show I just
know what it means but it feels like
this is these people are just all lying
to you yeah and I I was I think I was
talking to Jack and the team the other
day about going to Thailand and being so
far away from home and people coming up
to you like thousands of people we doing
this meet and greet thing and saying
these things to you and you and I said
to the team I was like I think it's like
it's part of my brain that's like these
people are lying to me and also
um yeah you can see how it can be a
slippery slope to slide in to their
Narrative of you right and you've got to
do quite a lot to just like stay at home
what I mean by stay at home I don't mean
like physical location I mean like
staying grounded in like who you
actually are right um and this goes for
people that obviously you know have a a
public platform or don't it's very easy
for one person on the internet to say
something to you and then you to start
to accept that as your narrative it's
easy for your parents to tell you that
you should be a doctor and then you go
to university and you study to be a
doctor and you become a doctor and then
you start thinking you're a doctor and
how that can sway you away from the full
array of things that make you who you
are the music you know the the whatever
Hobbies you had yeah narratives are
comfortable sometimes they make us feel
heard and understood they make us fit
yeah but they also are a double-edged
sword because they can take us away from
like who we actually are yes yeah so
when I think about you know your
experience of feeling like people must
be lying to you I mean sometimes we call
this something like the impostor
syndrome where you never thought of it
like that you know it yeah projected
personal
that is is you know true in a way but
also doesn't capture the fullness of who
you are or maybe is so extreme in terms
of um looking good that it's inevitable
that you'll feel some dissonance with
that kind of heroic figure and I think
the way to think about that and
also you know um not become like
cynically suspicious of people who who
who praise you when they meet you is
just to recognize that you have become a
kind of Cipher or a vehicle for their
projections so they've listened to you
they've had a very positive experience
or maybe they learned something and it
meant a lot in their lives and you were
the vehicle for that and so you're a
symbol for them and they're projecting
positive feelings onto you and because
you're now integrated in their mental
tapestry as kind of a you know a totemic
figure or a token something important Sy
interesting cuz part of what you just as
you were talking I was thinking you know
what's interesting I don't even I'm not
even the smart one in
this I'm interviewing these smart people
no and the smart people are changing
their lives and then someone comes up to
me in Thailand and says well you're
wrong about that so you're obviously
really smart and you also have you know
a really high emotion quotient right
which is its own kind of
underappreciated smarts where you read
people really well and you have
intuitive reasoning
and I mean I don't know you but you also
seem very humble and real and so all of
these things that people have a craving
for you know authenticity someone they
can relate to um someone familiar I mean
keep in mind too that more and more
people live alone and have maybe fewer
close contacts so a person like you with
a regular show that they tune into to
regularly you become you're in their
living room yeah you're not just some
distant celebrity like you are your
voice is there your face is there they
feel they know you because they've seen
you in all these different situations
and I think that's really natural and
normal and not a bad thing so you just
have to realize when you go out into the
world you know you You' become a symbol
for people they're projecting onto you
you don't have to necessarily identify
with that but it's okay to let them have
you know their experience through you if
that makes any sense it makes a lot of
sense okay yeah no it makes a lot of
sense I felt the same imposter syndrome
as you said everything there I was like
that's um very kind of you to say but
it's it's just very I think part of the
dissonance comes from the fact that I
sit here in a room with you and there's
only the person in this whole room we're
in this big Studio here in Los Angeles
is Jack yeah and so there's part of your
brain the like prehistoric brain that
thinks the three people that are aware
of what happened in this room are me you
and Jack that's it yeah and then you you
go to you go to Kuwait right
amazing and a comes up to you in the gym
and goes that conversation that you had
about addiction right and that that's
the dissonance like you went there yeah
but it's I don't know the preo brain
might might not be able to fully
comprehend the idea of cameras and
numbers you know people are listening at
the moment oh no they feel that they're
there and they and and again you you
know the guests are totally secondary
because they're watching because they're
identifying with you and the questions
that you ask as you yourself said are
questions that you anticipate they would
want to ask right you said that so you
are also channeling
them when it comes to food I trust my
gut and I trust Zoe a business I'm an
investor in and today's sponsor of this
podcast all the nutritionists I've
spoken to have highlighted just how
misleading information is out there when
it comes to food take healthy Halos the
claims you see on packaging that say
things like low sugar and nothing
artificial are often a sign of foods to
avoid have you ever noticed a health
claim on fresh fruit you probably get my
point understandably there's loads of
distrust out there who should you turn
to for accurate information I use Zoe
which is backed by one of the world's
largest microbiome databases and most
scientifically Advanced atome gut health
tests Zoe gives you proven science
whenever you need it as a Zoe member
you'll get an at-home test kit and
personalized nutrition program to help
you make smarter food choices that
support your gut to sign up visit
zoe.com and use my code stepen 10 for
10% off your membership that's zoe.com
code Steven 10 trust your gut trust Zoe
on this point of how we help someone in
our lives who's suffering with some of
the things we've talked about
today what is a bad way to try and help
someone because we're in our in our love
for them sometimes we do things which
even in my own experience of people that
are struggling in my life I think
actually I think in my pursuit of
helping them I've actually hurt them in
some way yes well you know there's this
whole uh sort of area of the addiction
field called
codependency and codependency refers to
the ways in which a loved one of the
addicted person can actually enable or
make their addiction worse without
realizing it and without intending to
and the way that essentially happens is
that we can well number one addiction
can is very often a family systems
problem so the person who gets addicted
their addiction affects everybody in the
family and in order to cope and compens
say families can end up in these very
strange maladaptive places but they
often have difficulty seeing how to get
out of those situations or how their
behavior is harming their addicted loved
one because in a sense they themselves
get addicted to the addicted person and
then use that addicted person to
regulate the way that they feel so for
example I treat a lot of families where
like the adult child is deep in their
addiction the parents know that the
money they're giving the child is mostly
going to drugs and yet cannot bring
themselves to stop giving the money and
often they're manipulated by the child
the child saying well the adult child
saying something like well if you don't
give me money for drugs I'm going to go
get it off the streets and it's going to
be laced with fentel then I'll I'm going
to die and it's going to be on your
hands so this kind of like emotional
hostage taking but even when it's not
that blatant what can happen is just
this very
fascinating very twisted and meshed
relationship between the addicted person
and the codependent person where again
having the person engage in their
Addiction in a way is a predictable
scenario for the codependent person so
even though they may say on the face of
it they want this person to stop their
Addiction on another another level they
really don't they get to be the Martyr
they get to be the Savior or they even
just get
to
predict what that person is doing based
on their use I've had experiences in my
life and this is why I really wanted to
ask this question where I thought I was
helping someone yeah and then the minute
I withdrew the help and basically
completely gave up the person got better
yes but for six seven eight years this
person struggled and the minute I
stopped helping they got better I was
like so I I I said to my partner before
when I was talking about this I was like
it's possible to prop someone up in
their like compulsive behavior and not
realize you're doing it in fact there's
three examples which me and my friends
are aware of and one of my friends talks
openly about this where I was propping
him up yeah I was letting him stay at my
house I was providing for him while he
was in his struggles the minute I had a
difficult conversation with him when he
was I think I was 25 years old and he
was 30 and I said you got to go you got
to go you got to get out of my house he
went back moved in with his parents in
his childhood room he built up his whole
life again he's out of the compulsive
behaviors he's very successful very rich
living abroad now I was like God if I
hadn't have pushed him out my like
basement he probably would still be
there I thought I was doing him a favor
and there's another really poent example
to me quite recently where someone who
I've known for many many many years um
minute I said to them listen and this
sounds really harsh right because I
tried paying for their therapy tried
paying for everything for this person
and eventually I got to the point where
I said honestly I tried don't talk to me
about this anymore yeah stop talking to
me about it just don't message me about
it don't talk to me about it anymore
they got better yep yeah it's really F
so so there um Kai Erikson wrote this
book on deviants where he studied
Puritan societies and found that no
matter what group of humans you looked
at there was always there were always
going to be people who were on the
margins of the society he he use the
word deviant his point being
that groups of
humans we just have these roles and we
have these hierarchies and there's
always somebody on top and always
somebody below and when when we're
occupying a certain Niche or when we
stop occupying it we make room for
somebody else so when you stop being the
hero and the Savior that person had room
to stop being the sick victim
interesting yeah and my last question on
this then is how do you approach that
conversation with that person because so
often it's approached through
frustration or shame or blame um what's
the best way to approach someone who's
struggling with a behavior to express
that your concerned and to I don't know
offer your help if that's a good thing I
think we can always try to find our
empathy for them without
necessarily um doing things that would
perpetuate or enable that behavior and
we need to recognize that for many
people with severe addiction the the the
only thing that will get them into
recovery is real life
consequences real life negative
consequences and that our trying to
protect them from that is not protecting
them at all we've got to let them hit
the rock bottom I mean this is a hard
one because you have a lot of families
now dealing with children who are
severely addicted to opioids for whom
you know being out on the streets might
really result in their death so this is
not for every situation but I can tell
you in my clinical experience after 25
plus
years the majority of people with severe
addiction who get into recovery get into
recovery as the result
of a real life negative consequences
lost their job lost their partner ended
up in jail what whatever it was until
there are those significant consequences
for some people they just won't be able
to have the motivation to make a change
guys back to a quote I had a long time
ago some 10 years ago that said change
happens when the pain of staying the
same becomes greater than than the pain
of making a change there you go that's a
good one I want to talk about digital
drugs one of the subjects that's been
recurring theme on this podcast inspired
initially I think it was mentioned in an
episode we had but then it was um such a
huge amount of the feedback we got in
the comment section that I thought we
need to talk about this more because
clearly there's a lot of people
suffering we also then used a tool um
which looks at what people are Googling
in searching a lot and one of the most
popular searches around the subject
matter of addiction is pornography
addiction yeah it's actually it was
number number one and four in the The
Search tool that we used and the phrases
people are using are how to stop
pornograph addiction how to help someone
with pornography addiction how to rewire
my brain which are sort of all sort of
correlated themes so pornography
addiction something you see a lot oh my
gosh I have to create a little bit of a
space actually before I ask this
question because I did a porn debate on
the show and I got a very long voice
note from a good friend of mine who said
just watch the porn debate there was two
women there and a guy and me stevenh um
but I just wish someone had mentioned
that women get addicted to addicted to
porn too yeah and then on the episode
one of the top three comments on the
episode is I'm a woman um it wasn't
mentioned but I also have a pornography
addiction and you've also kind of echoed
that with the erotic like novels that
you you mentioned romantic novels so
pornography addiction do you see that
often and I guess critically how does
one go about overcoming that and how do
you know it's a pornography addiction I
guess it goes back to the point of harm
but yeah yes yeah so um I do think that
pornography addiction is
one of the biggest addictions and the
most silent and the most shameful
addictions that we have now in the
modern
world um we will not infrequently have a
patient come in to the clinic who claims
to have other problems and it's not
until visit three or four that they
finally fess up I'm really here for a
pornography
addiction there's so much shame around
it it's so incredibly shameful for
people to admit that they are spending
their time looking at these images often
associated with compulsive
masturbation some people their addiction
manifests by actually pursuing Partners
so dating apps are highly addictive and
and meetups all of this is related to
sex an orgasm which releases dopamine in
the reward pathway but it's not just the
moment of orgasm it's all of the rituals
and the buildup and the searching um
that's related to it women can get
addicted to pornography as well as men
although I would say that men outnumber
women um probably you know in my
clinical experience um I don't know 10
to one women however are much more
vulnerable to love addiction which is
also real right uh the pathological
compulsive falling in love with Partners
um and then getting into these
relationships that are really dramatic
and not healthy and then falling out of
love and then pursuing doing another
love partner so the these addictions are
real um they are very harmful for people
who get addicted ultimately they're not
even about sex they're about human
attachment and the desire for human
attachment and also just as a way to
self- soothe and Escape our own everyday
suffering
and I'm particularly concerned about
girls and boys who now have access to
all kinds of sexual images that would
not have been possible for them to get
access to a generation or two ago and
now you know a child with five with an
iPad can accidentally end up um on a
site that has very graphic uh sexual
images and videos so what's the harm of
pornography watching
pornography well there's a lot lot of
potential harms one of the harms
especially if combined with you know
compulsive masturbation is that just
simply addictive which means that the
more people do it the more they want to
do it then they have the come down where
they don't feel good and then pretty
soon it becomes like a a compulsive
repetitive Loop where they're spending
large amounts of their day uh engaging
in this activity and that that in itself
is highly
debilitating but other harms um I think
that are significant are it really does
change a person's conceptualization of
what sex is is and what sex is for and I
don't want to get into the whole thing
of like you know sex is exercise or sex
is recreational fun compared with sex
you know as something that's maybe more
sacred because I I I I'm not here to
judge any of that except to say that if
a main pathway for a young person to
learn about sex is through watching
pornography that's going to give them a
very distorted view of what you know
real sex uh is like not to mention what
relationships are like right and how sex
um becomes a part of um an intimate
relationship I've heard a few people say
that pornography lowers our motivation
to go out there in the world and to
pursue getting a job and getting a
career and going to the gym etc etc and
through the lens of what we've talked
about today where dopamine was this
motivating force for those rats to just
reach out and eat the food if you remove
the dopamine from the rat's and it
wouldn't even eat food in front of it
and it will starve to death when we
think about men you said roughly in your
practice about 90% of the people that
come in with a pornography addiction of
men this all kind of overlaps to create
this picture that in the modern world
when we think about why more men are
lonely why they're more often in their
basements playing video games now or
watching pornography than ever before
why they're having less sex and having
sex later um why they're struggling to
form Rel
relationships um why less men are
potentially in college at the moment um
maybe some of the answers are in the
fact of just like how men are wired
because if they've thinking this through
if men are more likely to have a
disposition to these kinds of behaviors
then these kinds of behaviors are more
likely to impact and demotivate and
destabilize men is that all like rough
broadly accurate I absolutely agree
which is why I've talked about the
smartphone as a masturbation machine
essentially these devices have become
the way that we meet our physical
emotional sexual intellectual needs and
taken to the extreme that would mean
that we're no longer relying on other
people to meet those needs we're meeting
the needs ourselves with with this
technology and with the devices and I
don't think that's a future that anybody
wants taken to the extreme right because
we are social creatures we need to
connect with each other human connection
is vital to a thriving life and survival
in general so yes I have a lot of
concerns that that pornography is now
replacing intimacy with people in real
life or disrupting our expectations of
intimacy with people in real life when
you say expectations do you mean like
hard work we have to do to create and
find intimacy that too and also just
expectations around sex
a lot of folks that I work with with sex
addiction as they try to give up
pornography compulsive masturbation or
whatever they Define as their uh sexual
adct sexually addictive
behaviors what they find is that they
almost go in the opposite direction and
they kind of have zero interest in sex
or they just don't have interest in sex
with their real life partner or they
can't enjoy sex with their real life
partner you know which all kind of makes
sense right when you hijack the reward
pathway with this incredibly potent
version of sex you come back down to
earth with your actual partner who's got
his or her own needs and you know aging
bodies or whatever it is um it's hard
to experience pleasure in that realm in
an attempt to offer people out there now
that are struggling with some kind of
form of compulsive Behavior or addiction
a pathway to turn this around what is
step one in your book I talk I've read
all these incredible ideas is around the
wisdom we can learn from addicts I
learned about dopamine fasting and I
also learned about radical honesty in
the role that that plays what is the
process so someone listening to this
right now they're struggling with one of
these addictions they've got a
pornography addiction they're addicted
to gaming maybe it's food maybe it's
erotic novels maybe they're on they
Twilight the reading Twilight at the
moment what what do you say to that
person at the step one
is step one is really just acknowledging
the behavior that it's problematic and
that it might require some changing in
our lives um um the next step is being
honest with ourselves and maybe another
person about why we do the behavior what
we get out of it what's positive uh step
three would be honestly making a list of
all of the problems with the behavior
how is it interfering with my goals and
as we talked about my values what do
other people say to me about how it's
problematic is one of the problems
potentially that it's just not working
anymore the way that it used to right
I'm developing tolerance I need more to
get the same effect it's doing the
opposite of what I want it to do and
after we've done all that really done a
really honest self
assessment about the
behavior I recommend a 30-day dopamine
fast now we're not really fasting from
dopamine right because we're not really
ingesting dop me what we're doing a fast
from is whatever that substance or
behavior is that is causing these kinds
of problems potentially maybe we aren't
even really sure but we think it might
be give it up for 30 days why 30 days
well we know that two weeks is not
enough right we know that from this
Imaging study right that people are
still in that dopamine deficit state two
weeks after stopping but 30 days based
on clinical experience not just mine but
that of many other people who do this
work that no for most people no matter
the drug and no matter sort of the
severity and chronicity once they get to
about 30 days they begin to feel better
they begin to come out of of that tunnel
of constant craving they begin to be
able to imagine a life in which they
would um you know not necessarily have
to rely on this substance or on this
Behavior what I always tell folks when
they're preparing for the dopamine fast
is just remember you will feel worse
before you feel better but that is
withdrawal mediated suffering once you
get through those first 14 days you'll
begin to feel better and potentially by
30 days you'll feel much better than you
have in a really long time now this is
not to say that 30 days of fasting is
going to cure your addiction not at all
um but it's the beginning it's the
beginning of being able to see causality
getting some insight it's an experiment
right our lives are one big experiment
what better way to understand the
variables in our lives than to change
one thing one variable and see what
happens do we then need to you talk
about this concept of
self-binding yes self-binding right what
role not PL what this self-binding is a
way of acknowledging that if we rely on
Willpower alone we will not be
successful especially living in this
drug aied world and what we need to do
is anticipate desire before we're in the
throws of Desire by creating both
literal and metacognitive or thought you
know gunan experiment like barriers
between ourselves and our drug of choice
so these barriers can be actual physical
barriers like putting our
device into a kitchen safe and locking
it up over the night or leaving it
outside of our bedroom or getting the
potato chips the alcohol the Cannabis
out of the house deleting our contact
drug dealers information and telling our
drug dealer don't call me and I won't
call you um because these are all cues
these are all cues that's right and the
cues can be physical things so someone I
see can cues cues can also be basically
an emotion you talked about halt hungry
angry tired I eat well during the day
like now as I leave here there'll be a
salad I reckon in the in the Green Room
over there for me and the only time
where I'm susceptible to not eating well
is if it's late and so when you said the
hungry angry lonely tide thing that is
probably the state that I'm in sometimes
when I get home certainly hungry
certainly tired probably a little bit
lonely as well but certainly those two
things and that seems to be when I'm
most susceptible to making a regrettable
decision as it relates to my dopamine
I've also wondered if if dopamine is
responsible for what people almost call
like the sugar Cravings that we have so
what I've observed is in previous years
of my life when when I was eating lots
of sugar I would then go into about like
a two week cycle of like binging the
sugar and right now I'm in like a really
great cycle of with my food where I have
no cravings for the sugar I'm I'm in a
staying in a hotel here in La there's a
mini bar in the room with Oreos and
gummy all these chocolates and all these
things and I haven't touched them
because for some reason in this like
couple of weeks of my life or whatever I
just don't have the Cravings anymore but
I kind of suspect that if I start eating
them yes then the next four weeks will
be a car crash yes why does this happen
yeah it's so fascinating and and I think
this is sort of a universal experience
so first of all sugar is addictive it
lights up the same reward pathway as
drugs and alcohol clear dopamine release
in the nucleus bins part of the reward
pathway in response to sugar and when we
quit sugar we have a come down right we
go into withdrawal and it's manifested
in all the different ways that we've
talked about and it lasts for about two
weeks and one of the most Salient
symptoms is intense craving for sugar
and it's so amazing how intense it is
but if we can get through that period
and get out of that Vortex of addictive
craving the craving gradually gets
better and then eventually goes away
which is by the way very paradoxical
because whatever our drug is when we
first stop it we have intense cravings
and we have the feeling that the
Cravings will only get worse with time
even though we logically may have
experienced otherwise by giving it up
before we have the feeling this is going
to last forever it never does right with
time the craving goes away and once we
are in that Arena where we're not
constantly craving we might have
something that triggers the craving
right but like stress but generally
we're not dealing with a craving if we
were then to reexpose our brains to a
little bit of sugar immediately back in
the vortex of craving and there's an
experiment I love that illustrates this
it's an experiment in rats where rats
were injected with cocaine the same
amount of cocaine every day for seven
days and over the course of those seven
days the rats went from kind of hiding
in the shadows of the cage to
progressively running a little bit more
and a little bit more and by day seven
they were in a running frenzy right as
measured by these beams of light that
they were
crossing then there was no more cocaine
injected after seven days and no cocaine
or any addictive substance administered
to the rats for a year which is a rat
lifetime a really long time that would
make you think oh you know that there's
no more cocaine in the system no none of
that and then the rats were injected
with a single dose of cocaine and
immediately they were plunged back into
that running frenzy that you saw on day
seven really important information
because it tells us that there's some
kind of permanent latent
echo in our brains once we've been
exposed to and especially if we become
addicted to a particular substance such
that even with sustained abstinence on
the order of years and decades if we are
reexposed to that drug we can
immediately be plunged into the depths
of our addiction there's no ramp up
period that happens and of course we see
this all the time you know people with
alcohol addiction who are then exposed
to alcohol and right back to their Max
use or even exposed to something like
opioids and alcohol also works on our
endogenous opioid system so there's some
homology or similarity between alcohol
and opioids and then immediately being
plunged into opioid addiction which then
leads them back to their alcohol whole
addiction it made me think about
children it made me think about children
because if I'm a 5-year-old and I'm
binging on sugar yeah this sets me up
for a life where I'm going to be I mean
based on the analogy I just the
experiment I just had based on the
experiment I just heard there it sets me
up for a life where I'm going to so
easily slip right back into that
addiction for sugar um and also I know
that the brain isn't fully developed
when we're children so maybe the effect
is even more um lasting
significant is any of that true yeah
it's all true which is why a big focus
of the addiction medicine field is
prevention and trying to make sure that
we protect kids brains from the harms of
these addictive substances and behaviors
like what from sugar to digital media
video games pornography social media or
any other drug you know nicotine so many
kids are vaping now you know taking 50
plus Puffs a day
on their nicotine Vape cannabis alcohol
what's going on in the brain if we if a
kid is exposed to those things so
essentially at age five we have more
neurons and neuronal
connections than we have in the rest of
our adult lives about 50% more neuronal
connections than we'll have it as adults
which is what makes us such good
Learners when we're kids kids can just
absorb anything because they're sort of
like these Tod potent sponges with all
these neurons and all these neuronal
connections but we age through
adolescence to about age 25 we cut back
or what's called
prune the neural circuits that we don't
use and we myelinate or make more
efficient the neural circuits that we
use most often such that by age 25 we
are left with the neurological
scaffolding that will serve us for the
rest of our adult lives that means that
if we're engaging in addictive
maladaptive coping at a young age we're
elaborating a neural circuitry based on
that maladaptive coping which is going
to set us up for addiction in adulthood
I always like to emphasize though that
because the Child and Adolescent brain
is so plastic or Tod potent or so
changeable that's also a very hopeful
message it means that even a young
person exposed at a young age to an
addictive substance if we can get in
there early enough while their brain is
still plastic enough we can rewire them
whereas when I treat people in their 70s
and ' 80s
who have been you know smoking pot their
whole lives or drinking
alcohol mainly it was manageable now all
of a sudden they retire they're in their
60s all this time the pot's a lot more
potent they can develop these full-blown
addictive disorders late in life and
it's very hard to treat them because
they've lost a lot of that plasticity
that would allow them to regenerate new
neural Pathways once they
abstain what is the most important thing
that we didn't talk about that we should
have as it relates to dopamine oh my God
we talked about so much I I don't even
know it seems like it was a lot of stuff
I guess based on the questions you're
exposed to from the general public is
there anything that we missed that
someone at home right now is going to be
screaming at the screen um talk about
yeah well I mean I guess I would
emphasize that when I talk about the
dopamine fasting it's an early
intervention it's not an intervention
that I would recommend for someone who
had repeatedly tried to quit on their
own and been unable to you know clearly
that would be an exercise and futility
that person should go and get
professional help maybe they need to go
to a residential treatment center I also
wouldn't recommend dopamine fasting or
just quitting your drug of choice if
you're at risk for a lifethreatening
withdrawal so we can have
life-threatening withdrawal from alcohol
and benzo isipin like clopin Xanax
adaman again in those cases go see a
professional get help with a medical
detoxification before you try to you
know sustain absence for a period of
time so you know I would blanket the
whole thing with like the caveat go see
your addiction you go see the addiction
medicine specialist near you thank you
so much you're wel it's been so
unbelievably um
thought-provoking for for me in so many
ways I thought I knew what dopamine was
I thought I had covered all the ground
there was to cover on these subjects of
sort of compulsive behaviors but I was
so unbelievably wrong and it wasn't
until I got into your book and started
reading through your work that I was
like oh my God most people have a clue
about dopamine and the role it plays on
us and this scale analogy is
particularly memorable because that
helps me to Think Through um many of the
behaviors that I have in my life that
I've either struggled with or become
quite stubborn in various ways but also
has turned a couple of lights on to some
of the things I said about like my sugar
um eating sugar and um even like going
to the gym and why like my motivation
can seem to fluctuate with the gym
sometimes it's so unbelievably important
because this little neurotransmitter
seems to control so much of our lives um
and we never taught anything about it so
we become these kind of puppets and the
puppet master is this this brain which
is firing off all of these
neurotransmitters that are determining
who we are who we become and also who we
don't become um thank you so so so much
I I know you were nervous coming here
today but I have to tell you you are
very brilliant you're exceptionally
brilliant in so many ways you you that's
why I said you should start a podcast
because you're really Built For This
medium thank you you have a a certain
warmth and empathy to you while while
also being incredibly smart and
accessible in the way that you
communicate so please carry on because I
I don't think although you overcame that
the difficulty of those nerves I think
there's so many hundreds of thousands
and millions of people listening now
that are so thankful that you did oh
like really thankful that you did and if
youve just nudged their life a little
bit in a better Direction that's that's
worthwhile so thank you um we have a
closing tradition on this podcast where
the last guest leaves a question for the
next guest without knowing who they're
going to be leaving it for what is the
most recent piece of information that
changed your
life I think the most recent piece of
information that was very impactful for
me was the
realization
that we are probably going to
be cybernetically enhanced in the
future and interfacing with technology
in a way that's completely
seamless and that this is inevitable
we're going to become cyborgs or at
least we're going to be surrounded by
the technology in a way that's
invisible um and it's going it's going
to be just completely integrated into
our lives whether we'll it'll actually
be under the skin I think it will be um
but I can see in that so much potential
good and promise and and so much that's
really terrifying especially when I
think about the way it's going to change
us as humans and my big fear about it is
that we will become more and more
isolated and that we'll end up sort of
in these little cubicles of our own
making scattered alone all across you
know planet Earth I I hope it doesn't
lead to that but that's that's my word
it's interesting when we become
connected to the internet and we truly
interface with the internet we really
don't need to use our physical being
anymore because we can experience all
the joy and adventure and travel
digitally and that's I mean it just
messes with the incentive structures
like we've talked about with dopamine
yeah changes our ability to to get up
and go and to do
things I mean that's a lovely hopeful
ending for
us thank you so much
yeah thanks for the opportunity to you
know teach people about this information
I hope it's helpful for people super
helpful and I'm going to link both of
these books below I've got the dopamine
Nation book which was the original I
believe yes um and then following That
You released dopamine Nation workbook
which is a practical guide to find
balance in an age of indulgence I highly
recommend everybody reads these I'm
going to go and reread them on my
journey home back to London tonight so I
really really appreciate you read these
books and honestly everyone needs to go
read these books I'm sure they will so
thank you than you so much thank you so
much do you know that 80% of New Year's
resolutions fail by February it's
because we focus too much on the end
goal and we forget the small daily
actions that actually move us forward
those actions that are easy to do are
also easy not to do in life it's easy to
save a dollar so it's also easy not to
making one small Improvement each day
one tiny step in the right direction has
a big difference over time and that is
the 1% mindset which is why we created
the 1% diary a 90day journal designed to
help you stay consistent and focus on
the small wins and make real progress
over time it also gives you access to
the 1% Community a space where you can
stay accountable motivated inspired
along with many others on the same
Journey we launched the 1% diary in
November and it sold out so now we're
doing a second drop join the wait list
at the diary.com and you'll be the first
to know as soon as it's back in stock
I'll put the link below
[Music]
ah